let's be clear and honest about this
calories are not the issue this is all
about that's the problem that's how you
lose weight do Robert lustig is an
endocrinologist whose firsthand research
has explored the role sugar has on
fueling the world's most destructive
human conditions and answerers how we
can regain control of our health if you
consume one sugared beverage per day
your risk for diabetes goes up by 29% so
this is a big problem we also know that
if you have high sugar consumption it's
got multiple detriments effects such as
mental health problems cognitive decline
early death we also know it's the
primary driver of ADD but the problem is
Sugar's addictive and 73% of all of the
items in the grocery store are spiked
with added sugar by the food industry
cuz they know when they add it you buy
more you can't believe what they're
telling you if they say something is
healthy it's usually the opposite and
I'm part of numerous lawsuits suing the
food industry because they knew that
sugar was a problem
but they paid off scientists to say it
wasn't you've been hacked but a lot of
people don't have time to be doing a
fine tooth comb over every single thing
that they're putting into their body
they're not a scientist agreed so what
advice do we give that is simple and
actionable food can be medicine food can
also be poison and the question is how
do you figure out which is which so
here's the
secret congratulations daro gang we've
made some progress 63% of you that
listen to to this podcast regularly
don't subscribe which is down from
69% our goal is 50% so if you've ever
liked any of the videos we've posted if
you like this channel can you do me a
quick favor and hit the Subscribe button
it helps this channel more than you know
and the bigger the channel gets as
you've seen the bigger the guests get
thank you and enjoy this
episode Dr Robert
lustic on the front of your book it says
the hacking of the Mind very strong
words to use indeed whose mind has been
hacked and who is doing the hacking
yours mine everyone's who's been doing
it
well pretty
much anyone with a A belief system
that's not
yours and that's pretty much everybody
the bottom line is uh we have been sold
a bill of goods we as a society
we as individuals have been sold to bill
of goods and the idea of the book The
reason I put the book together is
because it actually makes us miserable
it has
stolen our Birthright and our birth
right is to be happy and we are not if
anything we're the opposite of happy
we're extraordinarily unhappy just look
at the incidence of depression around
the world not just in America not just
in the UK but
everywhere the World Health Organization
now says that 5% of all of the people on
the planet are clinically depressed and
here in America it's at
22% so we're really
unhappy the question is why is this if
you know our goal is to be happy it's in
the Declaration of Independence life
liberty in the pursuit of happiness well
we're
not so why the reason is is because we
have
substituted pleasure for
happiness what's the difference between
pleasure and
happiness well pleasure is shortlived
happiness is
longlived pleasure is visceral you feel
it in your body happiness is ethereal
you feel it above the neck pleasure is
taking like from a casino happiness is
giving like habitats for Humanity
pleasure is experience
alone happiness is usually experienced
in social
groups pleasure can be achieved with
substances happiness cannot be achieved
with
substances the extremes of pleasure
whether they be substances or behaviors
so substances Like Cocaine amphetamine
nicotine alcohol sugar or behaviors uh
shopping gambling social media internet
gaming pornography in the extreme all
lead to addiction there's an a holic
after every one of those shopaholic
sexaholic chocoholic alcoholic Etc but
there's no such thing as being addicted
to too much happiness and lastly number
seven the one that is the reason for the
book Pleasures dopamine happiness is
serotonin and they are not the
same so two different neurotransmitters
two different sets of receptors two
different areas of the brain two
different mechanisms of action two
different clearance mechanisms don't
dopamine is an excitatory
neurotransmitter what does that mean
means when dopamine is released in the
area of the reward center the nucleus
accumbent it's an actual anatomic
structure in the brain which you can see
on Imaging when dopamine is released
there and it binds to its receptor like
so you get the you transduce the
feelings of reward okay and reward is
good reward is what gets you out of bed
in the morning if you don't have reward
you know basically you shrivel up and
die okay reward is essential to the
survival of the species orgasm is reward
okay you know you need it it's it's part
of daily life but okay too much reward
is a different story and the reason is
because dopamine because it's an
excitatory
neurotransmitter it causes the next cell
to fire well if it causes the next cell
to Fire and Fire and
Fire that cell
dies neurons want to be tickled not
bludgeoned chronic overstimulation of
any neuron leads to neuronal cell death
so that postoptic neuron with the
dopamine receptor it's got a plan B it's
got a way of mitigating that negative
response it
downregulates the receptor so now more
dopamine less receptors less chance that
a molecule will find a receptor to bind
to well that means your the gain the
amplitude on the reward is going down
more and more for less and less the more
law of diminishing returns like an
addiction like a tolerance yeah
tolerance is one half of addiction and
then when the neurons do start to die
that is addiction exactly right so
dopamine drives addiction and it doesn't
matter what the cause of the dopamine
release is in the extreme it will be
addictive now
serotonin does not uh does not
downregulate its own receptor because
it's not an excitatory neurotransmitter
it's an inhibitory one so do you need to
downregulate an in inhibitory response
no an inhibitory means what well it
means puts the next neuron to rest okay
instead of stimulating instead of firing
it's actually calming okay right so
there's no such thing as being addicted
to too much happiness because the
receptors are still there but there's
one thing that downregulates
serotonin and that's dopamine so the
more pleasure you seek the more unhappy
you get and we've been told for the last
100 years that pleasure is
happiness neurologically the pathways
are entirely different as you say and
between pleasure and happiness one of
the ways that we have been h h
act
neurologically and Via our dopamine
receptors is through what we eat and
your book Fat Chance covers this really
profoundly in New York Times bestell the
first word in the subtitle there is the
word sugar MH I've heard a lot about
sugar um I see it in adverts I I I turn
over the back of anything I eat and it
says this word added sugar is sugar
really a problem in society has it
really hijacked us yes the answer is not
only is it a problem I personally think
it's the biggest problem it's not the
only problem but I think it is the
biggest one now why do I say that from a
systemic health issue the biggest
problem was trans fats what's a trans
fat trans fat is a fat that is has a
double bond in it that is flipped so
Norm normal unsaturated fats like olive
oil like canola oil like rap seed oil
like cesame oil like peanut oil okay Etc
they all have a double bond in them but
the double bond is in One Direction a
trans fat has the double bond in the
opposite direction one way to make a
trans fat is to heat it you put enough
heat across the double bond and it will
flip by itself so if you heat olive oil
too high you can actually make trans
fats at home but the food industry used
trans fats for food
stabilization for to increase shelf life
they've been using it in baked goods
since the
1920s the scientist who first figured
out that trans fats were
dangerous Fred Kumo figured this out in
1957 but it wasn't until 1988 that
anybody took him seriously and then we
started doing research on it and ized oh
my God this stuff is killing animals and
killing people and finally in
2013 so over 60 years after the initial
uh
science the FDA finally banned trans
fats in our
food without question trans fats are the
devil incarnate seriously you know
consumable poison no if Sor buts is
sugar poison
sugar is like alcohol so is alcohol
poison depends on the
dose right the dose determines the
poison paracelsus
1537 we have an innate capacity to
metabolize alcohol and if we stay below
that doesn't do too much damage if we go
above it different story same thing with
sugar same thing with this molecule the
sweet molecule fructose and the reason
is because fructose and alcohol are
metabolized virtually identically what's
the difference between sugar and
fructose so sugar dietary sugar the
sweet stuff the crystals the uh stuff
you put in your coffee the stuff I've
got over here yeah like that
stuff yeah that stuff the 10 the 5B bag
right there that's called sucros okay
this is sucrose this is sucrose now
sucrose is two molecules bound together
one molecule called glucose one molecule
called fructose they are not the same
now the food industry will tell you they
are the same they are not the same the
reason they tell you they are the same
is because that's the way they assuage
their own culpability for what they've
done to the food but they are not the
same they will say a sugar is a sugar a
calorie is a calorie a glucose and
fructose both have four calories per
gram why should you care oh you care a
lot you care a whole lot now glucose is
the energy of life every cell on the
planet Burns glucose for energy glucose
is so important that if you don't
consume it your body makes it okay the
Inuit had no carbohydrate they had ice
they had whale blubber they still had a
serum glucose level Inu so the people
that live in the uh North Poles and
stuff that's right yeah the forly known
as Eskimos right but they they didn't
have any carbohydrate they off fat but
they still had a serum glucose level
because your brain runs on glucose they
can also run on ketones too but you know
your brain runs on glucose my brain runs
on
glucose and you need glucose because
certain um hormones and certain proteins
in the body require
glycosilation in order to be effective
an example LH and FSH when you don't
have gly illation of LH and FSH the
hormones that tell your testicle and
your ovary to
work you are
infertile it's that simple so survival
of the species says you need some
glucose but if you're not consuming it
you'll still get it because your body
will make it it will make it out of
amino acids it will make it out of fat
gluconeogenesis it's called so glucose
is essential it's just not essential to
eat fructose on the other hand the a
sweet molecule in that bag which is sort
of one of the two parts of the the the
grain of sugar that I see one one part
of it is fructose that's right it's the
other half it's the the evil twin if you
will what are the two halves again
glucose yeah fructose found together I
need glucose to live my body will figure
that out
fructose do I need this you not only do
you not need
it but in high dose it's
toxic now your liver has has the innate
ability to
metabolize a small amount on the order
of about 6 to 9 teaspoons per day of
dietary sugar so half of that being
fructose so about 12 grams your liver
can manage about 12 gram of fructose a
day in the same way it can ma manage
about 12 grams of alcohol per day
without showing any signs of any U
metabolic derangement but if you go
above that that now you get problems are
we above that oh we are so above that we
are at 50 gram of fructose per day 100
gram of sugar per day we're supposed to
be at 25 we are at 100 we are quadruple
our limit and and also just because
grams are quite hard to wrap the head
around right okay so if I was to get a
tablespoon well do teaspoons a teaspoon
teaspoons how many teaspoons of sugar
what I have to consume to get to that
level of fructose CU I say this in part
because most of us don't realize that
we're consuming sugar that's right
because it's hidden in all of the food
that's exactly right we don't even know
we say oh I never even add sugar to my
coffee therefore my sugar consumption is
zero
wrong that is not true okay because it
is hidden in plain sight in virtually
every processed food in the entire
grocery store
73% of all of the items in the American
grocery store and in the British grocery
store are spiked with added sugar by the
food industry for its purposes not for
yours because they know when they add it
you buy more and how much does that look
like in teaspoons then the upper limit
is about six teaspoons of added sugar
per day the allowance the re all the re
the the upper limit okay the recommended
allowance is lower than that yeah okay
but the upper limit is about six
teaspoons of added sugar per day so in
alcohol terms that' be like one drink so
if you have a drink a day you're staying
below your threshold and all is fine
what if you have two drinks per
day now it depends on how well your
liver Works maybe how much exercise you
have how much total body mass you have
Etc what about if you have three drinks
a day you're going to get pretty tipsy
maybe you shouldn't be driving a car
right what if you have four drinks per
day you know they might have to you know
uh scrape you off the floor of the bar
with a spatula and what if you have five
drinks per day you're a fraking
alcoholic is what you are all right the
point is the dose determines the poison
well the same is true with sugar so we
have an innate capacity to
metabolize about 12 Gams of fructose per
day by the way that's for adults for
children it's onethird of that four gram
of fructose per
day okay four to six so we're talking
very little talking very little but when
you think about for instance kid in
America what you know 29% of kids in
America consume the National School
breakfast program breakfast in school
okay 29% so what is the National School
breakfast program breakfast it's a bowl
of Froot Loops and a glass of orange
juice that is 41 g of sugar the upper
limit for children in terms of their
metabolism is 12 gram per day they got
41 gam and it's just
breakfast what do you think that's going
to
do now if a calorie were a calorie and
if glucose and fructose were the same
then you say say well you get got to get
your calories
somewhere but because fructose is not
glucose because fructose is more like
alcohol because fructose toxicity has
nothing to do with its
calories that is a huge overdose and it
has metabolic complications has systemic
Health complications it has mental
health complications and ultimately it
has societal complications do you think
it has neurological consequences without
question it's the it's a primary driver
of add it's not the only driver but it's
one of them it's a primary driver
depression because we have the data as
it relates to ADD and ADHD and all those
kinds of things how do we know we have
functional MRI we have performance uh
data showing that when you take the
sugar out PE kids scores get better okay
we did this ourselves at UCSF we did a
study where we took 43 children with
obesity and metabol syndrome all high
sugar consumers all low socioeconomic
status children a Latino and
African-American all high sugar
consumers and what we did was we figured
out what they were eating on their home
diet we studied them on their home diet
and then for the next nine days we
catered their meals no added sugar we
took the added sugar from 28 Tas 28 uh
uh teaspoons of added sugar per day down
to
10 okay so huge reduction we gave them
fruit that was the only place they had
sugar in their diet otherwise we cut the
sugar out now if you do that you're
going to lose 350 to 400 calories per
day out of your diet all right so the
goal was to keep their weight stable
because if they lost weight the critics
would say well of course they got better
they lost weight so we needed to
maintain their weight so we had to put
something back in that was we caloric we
gave them extra starch so in the
vernacular we took the pastries out we
put the bagels in we took the sweeten
yogurt out we put the baked potato chips
in we took the chicken teriyaki out we
put the turkey hot dogs in so we didn't
give them good food we gave them crappy
food we gave them Safeway food you know
just cpg you know uh uh consumer
packaged Goods food you know okay so you
didn't give them vegetables just no we
didn't give them any vegetables okay but
it was no added sugar food okay it
wasn't funky food it was just food we
bought at Safeway but it was chosen to
not be um sugar containing okay and we
gave them a scale and every day we'd
call them up on the phone what your way
and if they were losing weight eat more
in order to maintain their weight for
the whole 10 days of the study and then
we studied them on day 10 every aspect
of their metabolic Health improved blood
pressure went down blood glucose went
down insulin went down their pancreas
has started working right again they had
a serum lactate level you're not
supposed to have a lactate level that
means your mitochondria are
dysfunctional if you have a lactate
level okay their lactate cleared
everything got better most importantly
for the first 5 days of that 10day
window the kids were obnoxious the
parents would complain to us my kid is a
disaster and the reason was because of
withdrawal they were withdrawing off
sugar withdrawing off
fructose and then like you know Moses
the sky
cleared and the
kids started concentrating better they
started doing better in school the
parents noticed they were less irritable
the teachers noticed they weren't
nuisances or trouble in the school
anymore the kids noticed they said this
the first time my head hasn't been in
the
clouds 5 days 5 days and in 10 days we
could see all of the metabolic
benefits even though they maintained
their weight even though they maintain
their calories sounds like a bit of a
scandal when I hear that these kids are
getting 30 almost 30% of kids are
getting you know almost you know three
to four times their recommended daily
allowance of sugar from school and that
it's having these sort of really adverse
consequences on us and the studies are
there to prove that the consequences are
very real MH it sounds like a scandal in
the sense that nobody's doing something
about it ah well yes that way it is the
point is that the food industry is very
powerful and they have you know um swept
virtually every aspect of this under the
rug for 40 to 50 years
they knew back in the
1960s that sugar was a problem but they
paid off scientists to say it wasn't and
we actually have the documents from the
food industry they live at the UCSF food
industry documents library and we are
doing research on corporate interference
in health what do those documents show
they show that in
1965 the sugar industry came to two
Harvard School of Public Health
scientists the head of the Department of
nutrition Fred stair and his associate
Mark hegstad who became the head of the
USDA uh five years later and paid them
$50,000 in today's money to produce two
articles for the New England Journal
saying saturated fat was the bad guy and
that sugar was
exonerated and they did and they did
it that's just one thing they did they
also infiltrated the National Institute
of dental research n IDR their study
sections and their uh executive uh
committee to take money away from
nutrition research for dental health and
put it toward a carries
vaccine a what a dental carries a Cav
vaccine okay how's that cavities vaccine
working for you okay we have all of the
data in their own words to demonstrate
that they knew exactly what they were
doing this is not hallucination this is
this is Hardcore fact and we've
published this and we now have a um a
center at UCSF devoted to understanding
the uh uh corporate determinance of
health and when we look across Society
at the consequences of this sort of
corporate interference some of the crazy
stats in your book fat chance that I
really sort of highlighted were that by
2050 obesity will become the norm not
the exception correct what the World
Health Organization said that the
percentage of obese people globally has
doubled in the last 28 years and in the
UK 28% of adults are obese and 36% of
them are overweight that's not from your
book but that's from some research we
did on the UK numbers as well well you
know the UK is the fat man of Europe yes
that's true having metabolic syndrome is
equal to losing 15 to 20 years of life
that was in your book that's correct um
which is startling um and worldwide
sugar consumption has tripled in just
the last 50 years correct all true now
you could say that's correlation not
causation but we actually have the
causation we have the data we have it in
mechanistic terms terms we have it in um
uh clinical Interventional uh uh efforts
we have it in societal efforts um
there's a method for determining proof
that doesn't need randomized control
trials it's called econometric analysis
this is what we have for for instance
climate change there's no control group
for climate change but we still know
it's true this is what we have for
tobacco and lung cancer you know you
don't have naive people start smoking
that would be illegal immoral get you
thrown in jail but we still know that
tobacco causes lung cancer we know that
football trauma causes chronic traumatic
Andy opathy okay none of these have
control groups but we know it's true
through econometric analysis this is a
method of using natural history data
over time to be able to determine
proximate cause and we have that for
sugar and diabetes and we have it for
sugar and heart disease and we have have
it for sugar and fatty liver disease and
of course we have it for sugar and tooth
decay we're working on sugar and cancer
and sugar and dementia we're not there
yet in your book fat fat chance um on a
on page
120 there was something particularly
curious because I think this is
a um yeah here we go it says the bottom
line is sugar consumption is a problem
33% of sugar consumption comes from
beverages yes
and the biggest abusers are the poor and
underserved indeed so let's talk about
beverages to start with then
MH diet beverages are they fine and how
bad are the sort of fizzy pot beverages
that most of us consume every day
so let's do the um sugar soft drinks
first okay okay they are really bad if
you consume one sugared beverage per day
your risk for diabetes goes up by
29% wow okay that's and diabetes and
that and that's if you have one if you
have two
58% and diabetes is now the main cause
of death in 40% of death certificates
exactly
right so this is a big problem so you
know that's demonstrating its toxicity
at you know shall we say medium dose you
know at low dose you can handle it
but you know as soon as you go above
that dose it's a problem and we have the
data for it okay and all of these are
factored in these are all econometric
analysis we've shown that sugar is a
proximate cause of diabetes whenever
sugar availability changes in any
country diabetes prevalence changes 3
years later and we've also done what's
known as advanced Markoff modeling where
we go into the future and show that when
sugar consumption goes down in any
country diabetes levels change in NE you
know reduce three years later so it's a
threeyear window between the change in
the diet and the change in the metabolic
Health consequences we have those data
and the fact that they work both on the
way up and on the way down is like you
know take it to the
bank now that's for the sugar beverages
you asked me about diet beverages I've
got one here let's let's uh look at it
all right I've covered up the logos cuz
I I've never seen this before I wonder
what that
is um the the data now show I mean for
it it took a while for these data to
come in but the data now show that the
toxicity of one sugared soda equals the
toxicity of two diet sodas half as bad
half as bad does not mean good half as
bad means half is bad well it says zero
sugar here so how can it be bad well so
because it's bad for a different reason
so the yes zero fructose zero calories I
agree but that doesn't make it good
makes it better than the sugared
alternative but it doesn't make it
good why number one you put something
sweet on the tongue message goes tongue
to brain Sugar's coming message goes
brain to pancreas Sugar's coming
release the
insulin so I still get an insulin
release you still get an insulin
response and the more other food you ate
the bigger the insulin response so you
will have an accentuated insulin
response because you were exposed to the
diet sweetener this is work from Yanina
Pino um uh 2013 at Wu St Louis and it's
been corroborated multiple times since
and why does that harm me having an
insulin response because insulin is a
bad guy so we always talk about glucose
being a bad guy in terms of diabetes and
it is of course but insulin's a bad guy
too glucose causes small vessels to be
dysfunctional causes endothelial cell
dysfunction it causes high blood
pressure because it causes those small
vessels to constrict it interferes with
nitric oxide uh which is one of the
things that relaxes the blood vessel and
it will you know basically reduce uh
blood flow to specific organs so high
glucose is not good for you and it's bad
for small vessel disease and that's why
diabetics get retinopathy nephropathy
neuropathy um uh kidney disease nerve
nerve nerve damage and um eye
disease but insulin is also a problem
because what insulin does is it causes
cell growth insulin is a growth factor
and it causes vascular smooth muscle
growth like in your coronary arteries
it causes glandular growth so it is one
of the primary drivers of heart disease
and
cancer so you can be a diabetic a type 2
diabetic and have your hemoglobin A1c
measure of your glucose uh uh uh control
down near normal near normal range
because you're on insulin or oral
hypoglycemics or even glp1 analoges for
that matter okay and you will die just
the same because you will die of a heart
attack or of a of a cancer because
diabetics uh have a much higher
incidence of cancer they also have a
higher incidence of dementia as well and
the reason is because of insulin because
insulin is a bad guy in this story
glucose causes microvascular disease the
insulin causes macrovascular
disease they're both bad you need to
control both of them and this controls
the glucose it doesn't control the
insulin do you drink that stuff of
course not just checking is there any
other physiological consequences to diet
sodas outside of the insulin response
indeed so the other thing that we've
learned about uh uh uh non-nutritive
sweeteners across the board is that they
alter the
microbiome now the microbiome is the
bacteria that live in your gut
now you have to feed your microbiome you
have to feed your bacteria because if
you don't feed your bacteria your
bacteria will feed on you it will strip
the mucin layer a protective physical
barrier right off the surface of your
intestinal epithelial cells and when it
does that it denudes them and allows for
other bacteria toxic bacteria to take up
residence and cause irritable bowel
syndrome inflammatory bowel disease and
the Junctions between the cells become
dysfunctional as well and so they cells
become permeable and so stuff you know
in your intestine the junk in your
intestine the you know sh you know what
can actually make it through into the
bloodstream you can measure the
endotoxins and the whole bacteria the
lipopolysaccharides in the bloodstream
when the intestine is damaged even from
diet soda and what that does is that
ultimately leads to SU systemic
inflammation and that systemic
inflammation also leads to metabolic
disease mental health problems cognitive
decline early death is there a
relationship between sugar and our
hormone levels of course I mean the main
one of course is diabetes I mean you
know insulin but um high sugar uh you
know I mean if you if you have U uh high
sugar consumption it's going to cause
changes in insin response at the level
of the liver it's going to cause fatty
liver disease okay it can change your
kidneys uh uh function uh you know which
can ultimately increase blood pressure
so it's yeah it's got multiple uh uh
potential detrimental effects what
impact does sugar have on our liver
what's going on there so as I mentioned
we have an innate capacity to metabolize
a limited amount
yeah everyone says oh Sugar's
energy
well yeah but not really not really so
let let's disect
that the food industry says glucose is
four calories per gram the food industry
says fructose is four calories per gram
therefore they're equal because they're
four calories per gram and if calories
were the issue then they would be right
but calories are not the
issue okay the whole issue of calories
has has to go down the tubes okay as far
as I'm concerned that's the problem and
I am here to # kill the calorie as a
unit of measure it has no place in our
uh in in our dialogue it has no place in
medicine calories
suck now why do I say
that if you
take a mole of glucose and you throw it
into a bomb calorimeter you will get
four calories per that's true if you
take fructose and you throw it in a bomb
calorimeter you will get four calories
per gram that's true we are not bomb
calorimeters
okay what's a bom calorimeter it's a
contraption that
explodes the whatever you put in it and
measures the heat that's uh given off
from it so it measures the amount of
calories in something effectively using
some that's what calories are is the
amount of heat required to raise one gr
of water degre Centigrade okay so it's a
measure of heat yeah is what it is
that's what calories are now we do our
burning in these little organel inside
each of ourselves called
mitochondria this is all about
mitochondria and when your mitochondri
will work efficiently and well you can
burn
energy uh uh you know to completion and
you can capture that energy in the form
of chemical energy in your cell called
ATP denzine triphosphate and that's what
your cell uses to power all of the
functions that the cell needs the little
molecular Motors and making stuff and
you know basically you know and and also
cleaning house you know and recycling
junk okay in order to keep your cells
Thrive thriving and Alive okay so
mitochondria are essential now
glucose stimulates mitochondria to work
better glucose is actually
good it it stimulates two enzymes
necessary for mitochondria to work it
stimulates an enzyme called
amyas which is a the enzyme that
actually makes more
mitochondria and it's the fuel gauge on
the liver cell so it tells the liver
make
more and it also stimulates an enzyme
called HH hydroxy asil COA dehydrogenase
which is necessary to cleave two carbon
fragments and uh burn them oxidize them
for energy too so glucose we can call
good because it helps
mitochondria fructose on the other hand
this sweet molecule in sugar in
sucrose it inhibits three
enzymes in mitochondria it inhibits that
amp kinase it inhibits an enzyme called
aadl asilo dehydrogenase long chain it
inhibits cpt1 carnitine pidol
transferase one that's the enzyme that
uh regenerates carnitine which is the
shuttle by which fatty acids can get
into the mitochondria to be burned so
the net effect of fructose is to inhibit
mitochondrial
function
so does
fructose constitute energy if fructose
is actually keeping you from making
chemical energy in your
cell this is the conundrum
what do you mean by energy if we're
talking heat then fructose is energy if
you're talking ATP fructose inhibits
ATP and that's what we're talking about
because that's what leads to systemic
health problems not the
heat so all of these people as far as
I'm concerned anyone who ever uses the
word calorie fire
them because they don't get it
they are part of the problem not part of
the
solution many people will say that sort
of counting calories has helped them
with their weight loss goals you tell me
virtually everybody who counts calories
loses a little bit of weight and then
they
plateau and then they get um you know
tired of their diet and the weight comes
rushing back okay 90% of people who try
to diet through caloric restriction
regain and sometimes yoyo back even
higher so are there I don't accept that
are there studies that support this idea
that sort of the the yo-yo dieting is a
BYOD of calic restriction not because of
caloric restriction it's a problem of
insulin resistance it's a problem of
when you gain the weight back did you
gain it in the liver as liver fat
because now you've got high insulin and
Insulin blocks this hormone that goes to
the brain called leptin that is in
charge of that set point so the higher
your insulin goes the less well your
brain can see leptin and so the less
well you can regulate and so that's what
drives your weight up even higher so you
don't regain the weight by eating you
know fish and vegetables you regain the
weight because you you know went for the
bread and the rice and the pasta and the
potatoes and the sugar what's a better
plan then if I'm trying to cut a couple
of pounds what's a better approach to
take versus sort of calorie counting or
these kind of things get the insulin
down there is no weight gain without
insulin insulin is the energy storage
hormone 20 years ago from doing the
research on kids with hypothalamic
tumors who released enormous amounts of
insulin we gave them a drug that
suppressed insulin release they lost
weight and they started exercising
spontaneously because we got their
insulin down we showed that the lower we
got the insulin the more weight they
lost and the better they felt insulin is
the bad guy in The Story So numerous
investigators you know the world over
have now demonstrated that insulin is a
primary driver of both obesity and
diabetes and metabolic syndrome you got
to get the insulin down okay how do you
get insulin down best way don't let it
go up what makes it go up refine
carbohydrate and sugar all the stuff you
have over there in that corner just to
be
clear he's not pointing at my lunch we
have a pile of different sugar products
that we brought for the interview over
in the cor Corner including various
things that you find on a shelf
everything from apple juice to some
popular snacks to um some like some some
other things just don't forget the
peanut butter
The Peanut Butter Cups yeah and even
this this is just sort of um it looks
like water but it's flavored water where
they've added sugar to it right um so
yeah all of that stuff over there all
that stuff so so get the insulin down
all right so cut the refined
carbohydrate cut the sugar the dietary
sugar that is the single best way to
mitigate this process by improving
insulin resistance by getting the
insulin down and we have done this time
and time again basically I turned my
obesity Clinic into an insulin reduction
clinic for this reason a lot of people
at a sort of a prefrontal cortex logical
level understand this they understand
that they shouldn't be having sugar but
it's well they think it's about calories
they do some people do think it's about
calories for sure but even the ones that
know that sugar is not something they
should be having still struggle they do
it's EAS because Sugar's addictive right
they struggle because sugar is addictive
we know because fructose stimulates that
nucleus cumb
yeah when we get stress which is a facet
of daily life now that's right we're
much more likely to to grab a sugary
snack indeed and there's a reason for
that too because when you're stressed
that actually puts a greater uh uh
burden on your amydala and your amydala
requires more energy hippocampus too by
the way amigdala is the emotional center
of the brain the fear center of the
brain okay and so you're trying to calm
it
and so you have to increase the energy
available so because you need more ATP
and even though fructose inhibits ATP
generation you still reach for that
because you're trying to mitigate the
metabolic consequences acutely when I'm
tied I think I have a high propensity to
grabbing sugar as well indeed why is
that because you're tired you're
stressed and your amydala is
dysfunctional and so it basically tells
you hell with it I I don't have any
sugar Cravings in the morning I've come
to come to learn I don't feel the need
for sugar in the morning it's sometimes
when we get later into the evening right
after a long day exactly it's when my my
Cravings you and everyone else and me
too by the way it's not like I'm uh
immune to this I I you know am on record
I gained a lot of weight while I was a
faculty member at UCSF and every
day at 400 p.m. I just ran out of gas
and so I ran across the street to get a
you know large chocolate chip cookie
okay and that was without question the
primary driver of my wak ging okay it
wasn't until I actually started doing
the research on this and seeing that the
kids felt better when we took the sugar
out of their diet that I actually put
two and two together for myself so now I
don't do that and my energy level stays
constant throughout the day what so what
advice do we give that is simple and
actionable for Jennifer or Judith or
Dave who's listening to this now they
are you know 40 years old potentially
they have a nine-to-five job they're
very busy maybe they have some kids to
feed at the same time they they don't
have time to be like you know looking at
doing a fine sort of tooth comb over
every single thing that they're putting
into their body they're not a scientist
agreed it's a it's a problem because the
food industry has made the grocery store
a Minefield and it's really easy to set
off an explosion if you walk in you're
basically lost that's how bad it
is understood so the the simple rule is
eat real food so what's Real Food
well food that came out of the ground or
animals that ate food that came out of
the ground the problem is we all lead
busy lives and we're looking for labor
saving devices cuz people don't even
have time to cook most people 33% of
Americans don't even know how to cook
anymore so like what are they going to
do so we understand this I mean it's a
problem
agreed we need
food that is metabolically healthy for
us not metabolically detrimental and the
problem is that as soon as you put the
added sugar in the food you have made it
metabolically detrimental now the food
industry will say well there are all
these other good things in there like
vitamins and minerals we fortify it Etc
so I'm here to tell you toxin a plus
antidote B still equals
Death okay just because they put some
vitamins in there or you take a dietary
supplement if it's not solving your
mitochondrial
dysfunction what's the
point so you can't believe what the food
industry is telling you okay if they say
something is healthy it's usually the
opposite whatever it says on the package
believe the opposite because they have
an incentive to put wrong stuff on the
package and I'll be honest with you I'm
part of you know uh numerous lawsuits
suing the food industry for deceptive
advertising misbranding mislabeling 70%
of all of the items in the American
Grocery Store are misbranded or
mislabeled in what way they say things
that are not true give me some examples
well first of all any time they use the
word
healthy okay um they say no added
sugar okay but in fact they put in apple
puree or raspberry puree or evaporated
cane juice you know they they there are
262 names for sugar and the food
industry uses all of
them and so they will say that
something's no added suar but that in
fact is actually not the case okay
there's there's a whole you know whole
host of this Kelloggs has been sued for
raisin brand okay everyone thinks raisin
brand well it's just raisins and brand
what color are the raisins in raisin
brand I've never seen it well I mean
raisins are purple yeah you purple brown
yeah yeah yeah yeah normally well the
the raisins in raisin brand are white
why if you take the raisins and raisin
brand that's supposed to be 11 gram of
sugar but on the side of the package it
says that one serving is 18 grams of
sugar where' the other seven come
from it's the white because they've all
been dipped in a sugar solution to make
them
sweeter as an example
okay so post has been sued General Mills
their's theirs was uh dismissed um uh
mandes a whole host of uh uh of
companies are actually under the gun now
to change their practices why do you
care so
much I am a
pediatrician my job is to take care of
children children are
vulnerable in the same way minorities
are vulnerable same way prisoners are
vulnerable okay they need a voice my job
is to give every kid a shot well we now
have neonatal
obesity we have babies being
born Israel South Africa Russia United
States four separate studies showing
that over the past 25 years birth weight
has gone up 200 grams half a pound in
all four countries and when you do dexa
scanning to look at body composition on
those newborns those 200 grams are all
fat we have neonatal obesity these kids
did not get obese by dieting and
exercising by gluttony and sloth they
came out of the
womb behind the
eightball it's my job as a pediatrician
to fix the problem that's what I care
okay can you just give me a little bit
of brief overview of everything you're
talking about the um studies you've
referenced all of that what is the
academic experience background research
that you've done that's built all of the
foundations of your knowledge I spent
the first 20 years of my medical
practice you know in Academia
basically you know doing what they told
me to do you know the way I learned it
and I thought calories were the same and
I thought that you know it didn't matter
and this is not what you do and this is
not how you take care of patients you
you know do prescriptions and you do
procedures and that's how you do it and
then I started doing research because I
was at St Jude Children's Research
Hospital taking care of these massively
obese kids who had brain
tumors that were treated by surgery or
radiation and they became massively
obese because of it because their
hypothalamus was damaged
because they couldn't see that leptin
signal that we talked about earlier
which is the hunger which it is part of
hunger it's not the only hunger related
it's more of an energy sufficiency
signal okay right it's the energy
sufficiency signal anyway when we
suppressed their insulin release with
that drug I mentioned before they lost
weight and they started exercising
spontaneously so we did that with adults
and guess what same thing happened and
we measured their energy expenditure and
instead of it going down as you'd expect
when you lose weight normally your
energy expenditure goes down their
expend energy expenditure went
up so what this told me was that insulin
is blocking leptin and as long as your
leptin's being
blocked you feel like crap and you're
hungry and you don't want to get off the
couch and as soon as your insulin goes
down now your brain can see the leptin
and you're not hungry and you can start
exercising what this showed me was that
the behaviors that we associate with
obesity the gluttony and the sloth are
actually secondary to this biochemical
phenomenon of insulin blocking
leptin and so this put me on the path of
understanding insulin as the problem
rather than insulin as the
result fix the insulin fix the
problem and so I've been doing that for
the last 25 years and that's what
brought you to the subject of sugar
because sugar increases insulin levels
well sugar causes insulin resistance
okay so there are two phenomena in with
insulin insulin release yeah which is an
acute phenomenon so that's when I eat
something there'll be some insulin
released which means my I have an
insulin Spike right and then it comes
back down nicely if I not or not or not
depending on how much and how
consistently I've been eating sugar
exactly right so if your liver has fat
in it and 45% of American adults now
have fat in their liver and 25% of kids
now have fat in their liver and they
never did before I mean before 19 uh 80
if you saw fat in the liver that was
alcohol but if 25% of kids who don't
drink alcohol have fat in their liver
how'd the fat get there sugar cuz sugar
gets turned into fat in the
liver that's the that's the driver of
this what that does is that causes a
phenomenon called insulin resistance
your liver doesn't work right so your
pancreas has to make more insulin to
make your liver work right you know like
you having to put more people on the
assembly line when you know people are
you know goofing off or you know not not
getting their job done right same idea
so you have to basically Goose the liver
to do its job well that raises insulin
levels all over the body and once that
happens now you're taking energy from
your bloodstream and putting it in fat
cells for storage so by getting the
insulin down so if it's insulin
resistance fixing the insulin resistance
by getting rid of the fat in the liver
or if it's the insulin release at the
beginning by lowering your refined
carbohydrate because that's the primary
stimulus of that first
Spike either way it's refined
carbohydrate in your sugar get the
insulin down and diabetes is when your
pancreas can't keep up okay so it's
really so much insulin it goes forget
this I'm done right it's the end result
of both of these um phenomena which
we've now realized is reversible I think
there was a school of thought once upon
a time that diabetes couldn't be
reversed but that's right but it is
reversible it is very reversible for a
while so let's be let's be clear and
honest about this there is absolutely no
doubt that what doctors learn in medical
school is wrong we are told and I know
cuz I was told that diabetes is a
chronic
progressive
unrelenting
disease that never gets better and that
you will need medication whether it be
insulin or oral hypoglycemics or
whatever for the rest of your
life
garbage total complete
trash now
Vera Health numerous other uh studies of
various diets show that you can
absolutely reverse type 2
diabetes in order to do so you have to
get the
pancreas to make insulin properly and
the only way to do that is to get the
liver to respond to insulin
properly one way is to not challenge the
liver give the liver a rest well it's
metabolizing all that refined
carbohydrate and sugar drop the refined
carbohydrate and sugar and make your
liver work better little kit so a
ketogenic diets the extreme version of
this it's not the only way but it is a
way paleo diet is another version
fasting intermittent fasting will give
your liver a chance to burn off the fat
that's accumulated over the last 16
hours there are many ways to skin this
cat calorie counting almost never
calorie
restriction yes calorie restriction but
it's got to be consistent and longterm
and we've shown numerous Studies have
shown that as you restrict calories that
leptin resistance does not get better
quickly it takes years for that leptin
resistance to finally go away like five
years before you change the set point
let's take a step back so what does
leptin do again it's about energy so
leptin is made in your fat cells yeah in
response to driving energy into fat the
cell will make leptin the leptin will
circulate in the bloodstream will go to
your brain go to your hypothalamus and
say hey I've got enough energy on board
okay to engage in expensive metabolic
processes so we don't need anym I don't
need to eat eat more I can engage in
puberty I can engage in pregnancy okay
okay both of which are high
metabolic uh uh processes okay okay so
it is like the servo mechanism like the
thermostat on your house okay you have a
a floor but no ceiling so when you're
when it's cold in your house the heat
kicks in but if you don't have air
conditioning it can go higher right same
idea with leptin floor no ceiling so
when your leptin goes below a certain
threshold your brain will see that as
starvation you get really hungry and so
you will get both hungry and you will
also sit on the couch okay okay
H so that's the way the activity
component comes in because your brain's
saying listen don't waste this energy
exactly conserve okay because we're in
trouble here we're we're in trouble down
here okay so eat more and don't
move that's the biochemistry that drives
the behavior why don't they have leptin
injections well they do oh really but it
turns out it doesn't work in leptin
resistance because the problem is not
that you're missing leptin the problem
is you have too much leptin it's just
not working so adding more leptin is
like throwing kerosene on the fire the
recepto sites have stopped receptor
sites are not there either they've been
downregulated or they're being blocked
one or the other if insulin blocks it
okay or they can be downregulated too
both now if you're leptin
deficient and there are 14 patients with
leptin deficiency and quite a few of
them by the way are in the UK of the 14
and sadf faruki and Steve O'Reilly at
Aden Brook's hos Aden Brook's Hospital
in Cambridge are the people who've done
the most work on leptin deficiency if
you take a patient who's LEP and
deficient they basically start gaining
weight as soon as they're born by age 6
months they're already massively obese
by the age of you know three they they
you you can't they can't even fit
through the
door okay they eat everything in sight
and they don't move you give them a shot
of leptin because they're deficient
you're replacing what's
missing and they slim down like that
they're genetically leptin deficient
they have a mutation in their leptin
Gene so obesity could be genetic in some
very very small cases very small number
of patients it is genetic but that's not
what's going on in the rest of the
population so yes is obesity genetic for
a small fraction sure we have leptin
deficiency we have letin receptor
deficiency we have pc1 deficiency we
have melanocortin 4 receptor deficiency
we have sim1 deficiency we there a whole
host of different genes and nobody has
them nobody has them all right like 14
people have them it's very rare for the
reason for General Garden variety
obesity out in the world to be due to a
genetic problem this is an environmental
problem in your book you talk about
environmental obesogens I've never heard
that term before what does it mean so
obesogens are chemicals in the
environment that actually drive weight
gain they cause the differentiation of
fat cells or they cause the growth of
fat cells now fat cells are
complex okay you have a certain number
but you can increase that number
especially early on in life there's a
critical period before Age 2 where you
can actually increase fat cell number
and once a fat cell is developed it
wants to stay filled I mean we got to
pause here just for a second because I
think most people think that when we eat
food we increase the number of fat cells
we have no we increase the size of the
fat cells we have this was a really I
learned this a couple of a couple of
years ago and it kind of changed the way
I think about a lot of things including
liposuction yeah because with
liposuction you kind of think that
you're taking away fat cells that you've
added to your body through diet but
actually the fat cells stay the same
they grow and Shrink well there's also a
problem with liposuction as well um
there are three fat
Depot okay and they're not the same on
the scale they're the same because you
weigh a certain amount but from a
metabolic standpoint they are not the
same so let's take each of the fat Depot
separately so that your audience will
understand what it is that they're
actually concerned about so the first
fat Depot is the obvious what we call
subcutaneous or big butt fat belly fat
as well no that comes later oh that's
the second one okay subcutaneous
cutanous big butt fat or does this
bathing suit make me look fat fat so are
you saying that's good or bad it's
actually good I agree it's
protective the more of it the less
likely that you will have metabolic
disease it is the place where your body
wants to put excess energy because it's
safe now most of us have a certain
ability to grow that fat to a certain
level before it starts becoming a
problem eventually you can overload that
subcutaneous fat where you will actually
make the fat vacu the little pocket of
of fat within the fat
cell grow so much that it will actually
cause the uh border of the V Ule to
decompensate and now you've spilled the
grease into the cell that will kill the
cell and that will cause um uh
inflammatory cells to congregate to try
to clean up the grease and then they
secrete um proteins called cyto coses
which end up causing the metabolic
dysfunction in any
case you can overload your subcutaneous
fat but you have to work at it so about
how much fat does your sub cutaneous fat
have to grow before you become
metabolically ill on average about 10
kilos 22 pounds some more some less okay
now let's take the second fat Depot
belly fat viseral fat this fat here
everyone's worst type of fat well yes
but not because of
Cosmetics because of
metabolism in any case the the visceral
fat the belly fat is that due to
calories is that due to weight gain that
is actually due to cortisol that's due
to
stress and the reason we know that is
because you can take patients who are
have endogenous clinical depression okay
they are
anhedonic they don't eat because they
generate no reward from Life they
generate no reward from eating
they are losing weight they have to be
admitted to the hospital to keep them
from killing themselves so these are
with people with suicidal ideation who
have to be admitted to psychiatric
hospitals you put them in a scanner and
it turns out they're losing subcutaneous
fat because they're not eating they're
gaining visceral fat because the
cortisol from the stress that goes along
with the depression is actually laying
down more fat in their
belly
why it's what cortisol does because when
you're stressed you need an a readily
available and metabolically active
source of energy in case you're being
chased by the lion so that metabolic fat
that visceral fat is eminently
retrievable rapidly oh okay interesting
okay
now how many pounds or kilos of visceral
fat you have to gain before you become
metabolically
ill I'm going to guess it's it's not a
lot based that's right not a lot so
subcutaneous was 10 kilograms that's
right now we're talking about two
kilograms okay so two kind of bags of
sugar yeah pretty
much okay now finally the third fat
Depot liver
fat now how many kilos of liver fat can
you acrw before you become metabolically
ill live is really small I no idea okay
one qu of a
kilo half a
pound and when you become metabolically
ill then all of the dysfunction we
talked about previously happens that's
right so you can become metabolically
ill and be thin because your
subcutaneous Fat's okay even your
visceral Fat's okay but if you've got
liver fat can you measure a quarter of a
kilo on the scale
no have you had the phrase skinny fat
that's this is skinny
fat so tofi TFI thin on the outside fat
on the inside skinny fat was actually
coined by Dr Jimmy Bell at University
College London okay neuro imager that's
exactly right so just because you're
overweight doesn't mean you're sick and
just because you're thin doesn't mean
you're healthy because of these three
fat Depot this is exactly what we're
talking about so are skinny fat people
typically more stressed if we kind of
they often are often are you they often
are the question is how did that liver
fat get formed the answer is sugar and
alcohol because that's where sugar and
alcohol go in order to be processed okay
and so that's why so many people now
have fatty liver disease that never had
it before that's why children have fatty
liver disease even though they don't
drink alcohol because they drink
something that is metabolized just like
alcohol like apple juice like apple
juice I've got a bottle of apple juice
here in front of me and on it it says 40
in big letters 40% less sugar than 100%
apple juice it says with added vitamins
a c and e they've added all three
vitamins in there that must be so that's
not apple juice that's an apple
drink to be to be clear it says apple
juice beverage here on the front ah they
called it a juice beverage not juice
there's a that that's technically
correct but there's a you know reason
they have to declare that from the FDA
why because they can't call it juice if
it's not juice if they've done something
to it I mean how would I know it says
apple juice beverage I well that that's
part of the
subugu
lawsuits they have to call it a juice
beverage because they've done something
to it okay so I've got this Apple in my
pocket mhm this apple here right this is
healthy that is healthy but if I blend
this down it looks like this no well the
question is what was lost in the process
of blending it
down you took away the good
part the fiber the fiber by the way you
don't know if that apple is as healthy
as it could be and the reason is cuz you
don't know if it was sprayed with
pesticides was it an organic apple or
was it just a standard commercial Apple
was a standard commercial Apple you
might have to wash it first why because
the pesticides can be environmental
obesogens many pesticides such as I mean
the the famous one was DDT now it's been
gone since
1972 Rachel Carson you know Silent
Spring you know was all about how DDT
was you know environmentally affecting
you know the entire world okay we banned
DDT in 1972 but you can measure the
metabolite of DDT called DDE in pregnant
women's urine today 50 years later and
that level of DDE in that pregnant woman
is predicting obesity in her
Offspring 11 years later so let's go
over these two subjects then we've got
environmental obesogens right I think
I've pronounced that correctly um let's
finish off on that and then I want to go
into fiber so environmental obesogens
which might be on this apple what what
are they and where where are they so uh
an obesogen is a chemical that causes
weight gain not because of its
calories okay now you say how can
something cause weight gain if it
doesn't have calories the answer is if
it causes the differentiation or growth
of fat cells it will cause weight gain
unrelated to calories so we have
chemicals in our environment that are
unescapable
you can't escape air pollution you can't
escape forever chemicals like for
instance pasas what's that polyfloral
alal substances
Teflon remember Teflon yeah yeah the
material the material that non-stick
pans were coated with yeah that's pasas
that was per floro octanoic acid turns
out that causes obesity by
itself it causes the differentiation and
growth of fat cells tributal tin this is
what you paint on the bottoms of boats
to keep Barnacles from attaching to the
hull it's in all of our food supply all
of our water supply all over the world
that causes fat cells to grow before
you're
born exposures to all sorts of things um
BPA bisphenol a okay when you get your
receipt your paper receipt from Target
that's bisphenol
a phalates or plasticizers you stick a
binky in a baby's mouth a pacifier
that's a plasticizer that's got phalates
in it that causes
obesity parabens in
cosmetics will cause
obesity vinyl
flooring um flame retardance in
children's clothing and in mattresses
all of these things will drive different
receptors in the body and act as what we
call endocrine
disruptors and those endocrine
disruptors will change the um uh
differentiation and the growth of fat
cells to increase
osity so what's an endocrine disruptor
so our cells have receptors that way
communication from one area of the body
to another can occur like hormones
binding to receptors well sometimes
they're not hormones sometimes they're
other chemicals that cause
differentiation of different uh uh areas
of the body to form different organs for
instance this is one of the things that
goes wrong in congenital uh defects like
congenital heart disease okay receptor
alterations so we have receptors on all
of our cells for different processes for
different
chemicals there are things in our
environment that basically
mimic endogenous signals to our body and
basically tell different tissues to do
different things than they ought to be
doing because those things are present
and one of them is obesity in my head I
think of it like a remember those toys
you used to play with when you were a
kid and it shows like a triangle shape
and a circle shape and a square shape
and you've got to pick up the
corresponding piece and Slot it in the
hole right I I see it as things in our
environment are pretending to be those
shapes so they're sort of impacting with
our recepto site right which is the
whole and causing us to do things that
are dysfunctional that's right and this
is well known has been known for years
we um you know it's one of the reasons
for the decrease in fertility the
changes in reproductive capacity it's
one of the reasons the alligator
population in the Everglades is
disappearing as endocrine disruptors
well it also has effect on
neurocognition and brain development and
potentially I don't want to you know get
too far a field but potentially might
play a role in autism we haven't proven
that yet I want to make that clear but
without question some of these chemicals
can cause fat cells to differentiate and
grow so if they're everywhere what do I
do about it because it's I feels like I
can't touch the floor I can't I can't go
to a I can't lay in a bed I'm like well
you can't do much about air pollution I
mean except as a society we can do
something we can't do much about uh the
Teflon in the in the water or the TBT in
the water except to try to pass
regulations to control those things but
you know get get Congress or Parliament
to do that you know that's a that's a
real trick is that better water that I
can drink sorry just on that point uh
well you can try uh certainly uh tap
water is going to be a problem but the
fact is some of the bottled waters still
have obesogens and to be honest with you
if there if it's bottled the obesogen
might be in the
bottle canned
foods if you look at the inside of the
can what color is it is it silver isn't
it silver or is it
White H if it's white that's
BPA so canned foods have high BPA levels
BPA is an estrogen okay and it doesn't
take much to be an estrogen 22 angst two
hydroxy groups you're an estrogen okay
there are a lot of chemicals in our
environment that masquerade as estrogens
and BPA is one of them and estrogen
causes fat deposition just look at the
curves of a woman that's estrogen
causing fat deposition well BPA can do
that
too so as an example but there are also
things in our food that we think are
food and one example is fructose now
fructose has calories true but fructose
has all these effects on mitochondria
that have nothing to do with its
calories in the same way that alcohol
has calories but alcohol has toxic
effects that have nothing to do with its
calories so just because something has
calories doesn't make it a food what's
the definition of food Stephen I will
tell you you was going to say don't ask
me substrate that contributes to either
growth or burning of an organism so
here's the question does ultra processed
food contribute to growth my colleague
Dr arrat manigo Oran who is the chairman
of nutrition at Hebrew University of
Jerusalem has looked at this question in
fact Ultra processed food inhibits
growth populations that are exposed to
high ultrapress food consumption have
lower final Heights than populations
that are not
so if it's inhibiting growth not a food
okay now let's take burning I've already
told you that there are three enzymes
that fructose which is in 73% of the
items in the American Grocery Store it
inhibits burning because it inhibits
mitochondrial function so if you don't
stimulate growth and you don't stimulate
burning is that a food no so if it's not
a food what is it poison so food can be
medicine food can also be poison and the
question is how do you figure out which
is
which when you walk into the grocery
store it all looks the same but in fact
there are things in there that will
contribute to growth and burning and
there are things that will inhibit it
and we need some method for being able
to
distinguish those we have it we made it
it exists on your computer it will
ultimately soon exist on your phone and
you will actually be able to order your
food to be metabolically healthy without
ever having to walk into that mine field
of a grocery store ever again how would
that be and just buy the stuff that's
good for you instead of chancing the
stuff that's bad for you it's called
perfect and what it does is it will
filter out all of the stuff in the
grocery store that's metabolically
unhealthy for you not for the next guy
for you you can apply specific filters
that will if you're glutenfree it will
take out all the things that have gluten
so you don't have to look at the label
if you are if you have metabolic
syndrome it will take all the refined
carbohydrate and all the sugar things
out so you don't even have to look at
them if you specifically want to avoid
the ultr processed food it will take
those out by the way that will cut
the items that you can see in the
grocery store by
80% how many of you started thinking
about your long-term Health when you hit
30 for me this was a wakeup moment of me
thinking to myself okay I probably need
to start paying a little bit more
attention now I already felt a change in
myself when I hit 30 with things like my
metabolism my energy levels so this year
is no different Zoe which is a company
I've invested in but also a company that
are a sponsor of this podcast helps me
to make smarter food choices all based
on their world leading science and my
own test results if I'm ordering food I
know how to make my takeaway so much
smarter by adding things like a side of
vegetables to eat first or choosing the
option with the most fiber Zoe helps me
to make that choice it guides me and
coaches me it's my personalized
nutrition coach that I have on me 24/7
and to help you start your Zoe journey
and start making smarter food choices
I'm giving you guys 10% off when you
join Zoe now all you've got to do is use
code ce10 at the check out when you sign
up enjoy and let me know how you get on
let's talk then about fiber we we talked
about it briefly but I want to just
really close off on the point of f
because you said that when we take an
apple here like the Apple in my hand and
we turn it into this thing in my hand
this apple juice right the harm is that
they're removing the fiber why does that
matter so everyone thinks that fiber is
the stuff you throw in the garbage after
you've Juiced the fruit we were told
forever
that the uh uh the juice had the
essential vitamins and minerals like the
vitamin
C or the lopine if you're a
tomato and that's true they do but turns
out the
fiber is essential it's just not
essential for
you it's essential for your bacteria
it's essential for your microbiome
that's what your bacteria want to eat
you have to feed your microbiome you
know always we always say when women are
pregnant you're eating for two well
we're always eating for 100
trillion okay the 100 trillion are in
our intestine and what you feed them
matters because if you feed them well
you will have what we call bacterial
diversity and you will not have one any
one species uh overwhelming any other
species and that will actually
contribute to metabolic Health it will
allow for the barriers in the intestine
to work properly the mucin layer the
tight junctions the uh immunologic
barrier called the th17 cells your
intestine will present the appropriate
barrier so that bad stuff in your
intestine won't get into your
bloodstream to cause systemic
inflammation
so feeding your gut is job one and what
does your gut like to eat it likes to
eat fiber now we humans don't have the
enzymes to digest fiber you need
specialized enzymes the bacteria have
them so the fiber is the food for the
bacteria when you take the fiber out of
the food you're starving the bacteria
now how many grams of fiber are we
supposed to eat every day
our ancestors ate between 50 and 100
grams of fiber a day the USDA says we're
supposed to consume 25 grams of fiber
per day how many grams do we actually
consume here in America and by the way
uke the same mean 12 so we're getting
half the amount the USDA says and one qu
the amount our ancestors did and the
question is does it matter the answer is
oh yeah it matters big
because what happens is when you
feed fiber to the bacteria you get
multiple species instead of one that
basically crowd out all the others okay
and you get this metabolic biodiversity
and it basically improves your metabolic
Health in addition the uh bacteria will
chew that soluble fiber up into a
compound called short chain fatty
acids acetate propionate butyrate
valorate berate is particularly helpful
it is an immune suppressant it keeps
your immune system in check it's one of
the reasons that covid was worse for
people who were obese and who had
pre-existing conditions like metabolic
syndrome and also of course minority
populations because of ultr processed
food consumption and lack of fiber lack
of short chain fatty acids therefore
lack of ability to fend off Foreign
Invaders because their immune systems
were not tamped
down where did the fiber go they took it
out why the because you can't freeze
fiber so that Apple okay yeah okay your
homework assignment for tonight y take
that apple and put it in your freezer
overnight take it out in the morning put
it on the kitchen
countertop let it thaw try to eat it see
what you get what am I going to get mush
oh really now why does that turn it into
mush the ice crystals that form will
mate the cell wall and let all the water
rush in okay okay turn it into mush food
industry knows that so what do they do
squeeze it and freeze it now it lasts
forever now you've you got apple juice
or frozen concentrated orange juice you
have taken a fruit which is food and you
have turned it into a
commodity storable food which you can
sell on the Commodities exchange because
it won't go bad so it has a price and
that price will fluctuate and you can
then bet on the Commodities exchange but
you can't sell fruit like that because
it'll go rancid by the time you've sold
it anywhere so all these people are
doing this to us um what responsibility
do I have on a personal
level because you know if these comp the
big companies with all this money
trillions of dollars they're all
manipulating me bastardizing my food
they you know hacking my brain giving me
these adverts y I am it's easy to fall
into the Trap of thinking listen I'm a
victim here well you are because you've
been hacked as we started this you know
the the podcast okay you you've been
told one thing and the real world is
actually something else okay you've been
hacked you specifically been hacked with
the notion that processed food is
food everyone thinks that because they
called it processed food maybe they
shouldn't call it processed food maybe
they should call it processed
nutrients because the stuff that's in it
are nutrients but it's not
food because it doesn't do what food
does which is contribute to growth or
burning
so the question is what's your
responsibility and what's society's
responsibility so this is a very
important question and it's a question
you know that comes up all the
time personal
responsibility does it exist well in
order to exercise personal
responsibility first you have to
exercise Free Will that's a
prerequisite so we can get into this and
we probably would need about 6
hours okay and we don't have it but do
we have free will yes or
no complicated question it's a
complicated question and it's one I've
actually been researching this week
funly enough for a different project
that I'm working on okay and I was
trying to find get to a point um where I
had a solid answer now there's a couple
of schools of thoughts here one school
of thought when we look at the
neurological um
processes might suggest and there's some
early studies that suggest that we have
much less Free Will than we assume
because things happen in our brain
before we make a decision there's some
studies there um
but do we have free will to make our own
decisions I think we have a lot less
Free Will than we think we have very
little free will yeah if at all here's
the best way to think of it Arthur
shopau famous German philosopher
famously said you are allowed to do what
you want but you are not allowed to want
what you
want those things are actually
predetermined so you have choice in
whether you want the candy bar or the
ice
cream but you don't have choice about
the fact that your nucleus succumbent is
Raging saying give me
sugar that's the choice the choice is
how you satisfy the biochemical drive
but the biochemical drive has you know
is is Way Beyond Free Will so the
question is if you don't have free will
how can you exercise personal
responsibility because that's a
prerequisite in order to be able to do
that because personal responsibility
says take the risks suffer the
consequences but if you can't control
the risks or the consequences how can
you exercise personal
responsibility I have just shown you
that the behaviors associated with
obesity the gluttony and the sloth are
actually secondary to the biochemistry
which you have absolutely no control
over in fact we have
no ability to be able to mitigate that
and that's why we have this obesity
pandemic and you know diet and exercise
hasn't solved it for just that reason
so who do we need to point the finger at
who needs to resolve the issue well it
has to be resolved at several uh levels
it has to be resolved for the public
that's why you and I are doing this
podcast now because they have to
understand what's really at issue okay
blaming the victim has never worked when
did it work did it work for
HIV did it work for tobacco it never
worked okay every personal
responsibility issue becomes a Public
Health
crisis because personal responsibility
hasn't solved any of them it's a loser
it's a loser in terms of its mechanism
and it's a loser in terms of its uh
efficacy doesn't work can I throw a
thought into there as well because in
some areas of Our Lives where we do have
discipline we tend to have a bias
towards assuming everyone else doesn't
have discipline and that's what they're
missing if that makes sense so great way
to blame people were listening to this
that don't struggle with diet and sugar
and all of those things and ex whatever
all those
subjects their brain will probably be
thinking God you can just choose not to
I choose not to all the time I choose
not to have the can of you know fizzy
drink all the time because their nuclear
succumbent is not going off like a
Christmas tree why is it not going off
like a Christmas tree we don't know yet
why do some people smoke and some people
don't why do some people drink and some
people don't look 40% of Americans are
tea tolers never touch the stuff 40% of
social drinkers can pick it up put it
down you know no problem I'm in that
category 20% are binge drinkers I sorry
10% are binge Drinkers and 10% are
chronic
alcoholics what distinguishes the 20%
who have a problem from the 80% who
don't we don't know yet to this day we
still don't know but we know that for
that 20% it is a problem we also know
there this thing called sugar addiction
and there's going to be on May 17th in
London the International Conference on
food addiction I will be the keynote
speaker um to discuss exactly this issue
is there such a thing as food addiction
and if there is such a thing as food
addiction does it portend uh need for
societal
remediation ra or is this really just a
personal responsibility issue well
everything that is both toxic and
addictive has required some sort of
societal intervention okay so you have
things that are toxic but not addictive
Like Oxygen and water you don't have to
regulate those you have things that are
addictive but not toxic like caffeine no
you don't have to really regulate that
either unless you add it to alcohol
which case then you have four Loco and
then you get arhythmia and then you do
have to regulate it but what if you're
both toxic and addictive like cocaine or
alcohol or nicotine or heroin
for those we all have uh uh societal
intervention you know rehab for the
personal and laws for the
societal for sugar for ultra-processed
food we have
nothing it's the same issue nothing
different so you want regulation from
the government on sugar I think that the
industory has to be told what to
do they haven't yet now the question is
would it work the answer is yeah it
would and actually who found out that it
would work the UK you did it it did it
back in the 2000s so in 2003 the Blair
government brought all of the uh UK uh
food manufacturers to the table in
secret so wait Rose and Tesco and M&S
and you know every other cpg uh purveyor
in in uh the UK and had a secret meeting
and were told and told them look
hypertension is running rampant and
stroke is breaking the NHS
bank and it's because of the sodium we
have to get the sodium levels in ultr
proc ESS Foods down so every one of you
is going to play by the same rules so
that there's no competitive disadvantage
and you're all going to reduce the
amount of sodium in each of your items
by 10% per year over a three-year period
so that there will be 30% less
sodium 3 years from now in 20 six it was
2007 I think at the time and they all
did and they didn't tell the public and
in 2011 famous paper in British medical
journal showed a 40% reduction in
hypertension and stroke due to this
public health intervention that the
Blair government did without telling the
public it works should have told the
public no don't tell the public so would
this work for
sugar so I am working with a company in
the Middle East right now okay I don't
take money okay it's a um you know I do
this because it's the right thing to do
uh it's called Kuwaiti Danish Dairy kdd
it's like the Nestle of the Middle East
and they make all sorts of junk they
make flavored milks they make ice cream
they make frozen yogurt they make
biscuits they make confectionary they
make tomato sauce okay like all bad
stuff right they came to me in 2020 and
said we want to be a metabolic healthy
company we want to do the right thing
because right now Kuwait has an 18%
diabetes rate and an 80% obesity rate
and we don't want to be the cause of
it can you help us re-engineer our
product
portfolio to be metabolically
healthy and so we com comen the
scientific advisory team and we've
worked for the past 3 years to develop a
set of guidelines a set of
principles and we have developed what we
call the metabolic
Matrix three principles three precepts
to turn food metabolically healthy and
here they are protect the liver feed the
gut support the brain any food that does
all three of those is healthy whether
it's ultr processed or not any food that
does none of the three is poison whether
it's Ultra processed or not
now why those three organs because if
you the data show in the literature if
you fix those three organs all the
downstream organs also get fixed whereas
if you fix other organs those three
organs don't get fixed so those three
organs are primary and all the data
shows that if you fix those three you
can actually improve both U morbidity
and
mortality so that's the the goal that's
the rubric
protect the liver feed the gut support
the brain so could we apply that
principle to the food supply can any
individual apply it to their own grocery
purchases use perfect you'll get it can
the government do it yeah they did it in
the UK they can do it again it's not
crazy it can be done the fact is we're
all carrying a belief system
around okay and now where did that
belief system come from the belief
system is that ultr processed food is
food yeah where did it come from came
from the food industry they told us so
the scientists and governments told us
so as well though if you look back
through history so how do we know the
scientists and governments are telling
us the truth
now that's a very good question that's a
super
question how do you know what's true
where we're in this problem right now
I'm worried that in 20 years time I'm
going to be sat on this podcast if
people are still listening and I'm going
to be sat with another scientist and
he's going to be saying do you know that
the uh Dr Robert lusting who you had on
20 years ago everything he said has been
disproved and he's going to say fructose
is the key apple juice is really
important we found out that uh
vegetables are causing autism did you
ever see the movie sleeper no Woody
Allen 1973 honestly I've seen no movies
he wakes up after 200 years and
suspended animation and he finds out
that hot fudge and deep fat are good for
you said oh we you know debunked all the
you know stuff from before so I get this
question all the
time everything we knew 10 years ago is
already wrong and everything we know
today will be wrong 10 years from
now so if everything we know today will
be wrong 10 years from now why do
anything about it cuz no matter what it
is is it's likely to be wrong this is
known as the pessimistic meta induction
Theory this is how the Dark Ages
started the idea of Dogma there's only
one Dogma Stephen and the Dogma is that
there is no
Dogma because everything has to be
refined Dogma how do you define the word
dogma Dogma means you take it on faith
okay you take it on faith okay that's
what science is for is to debunk the
previous generation's Dogma if we didn't
do that okay we'd still be using
leeches okay we've debunked that Dogma
we would still think that seizures were
demonic possession we've debunked that
Dogma okay ultimately science is not a
straight line it's a
zigzag okay but it still moves forward
so if I end up being discredited 10
years from now 20 years from now 30
years from now hey I was a cog in the
wheel at least I drove the the the
vehicle
forward that's
okay and science is really a process
isn't it it's exactly process it's not a
religious belief it's not a set of
answers it's just a process to
uncovering um information I guess but
you have to then evaluate each piece of
information for its veracity yeah
because the problem with information is
we are now peppered with disinformation
and how do you determine what's real and
what's not you say that to achieve
contentment you recommend following the
four CES for contentment indeed what are
the four CES by the way if you follow
the four seas you will be a whole lot
better off in terms of your
understanding information versus
disinformation so in my book hacking of
the American or contemporary mind I talk
about ways to lower your
dopamine reduce your cortisol and raise
your
serotonin and they're all four things
your mother told you and they're all
free and they're all available to
everyone on the
planet number
one connect now connect does not mean
through
Facebook connect does not mean digital
connection it means means social
connection it means what we're doing
right now face to face eye to eye now
why does Facebook not work why does Zoom
not work you're looking at somebody eye
to
eye they've they've now done the Imaging
studies okay there are a set of neurons
in the back of your head in the
occipital cortex called mirror neurons
and they are not just reading the lips
of the person you're talking to they are
reading the facial uh structure
and the muscle movements and they are
actually transducing the
emotion from the person you're talking
to when you're watching on a screen it
flattens out you can't tell so you don't
get the same
information that information ultimately
generates a serotonin signal so you get
contentment so social connection
actually drives contentment so that's
number one number two contribute and
does not mean to your retirement account
it means contribute to others okay
contribute with purpose like Habitat for
Humanity B basically giving to others
because when they when you give to
others you feel better yourself okay
that generates the serotonin the signal
okay so you know lottery winners you
know are not
happy but people who actually give their
money away are that's one of the reasons
why we have philanthropy makes people
feel better it's quite selfish in that
regard then isn't it in well yes indeed
it it seems selfless but it's actually
selfish which is fine it works just
great number three cope and cope is
three things it's sleep mindfulness
exercise all of which are necessary to
Tamp down
cortisol because you if you're sleep
deprived your cortisol goes through the
roof if you are um uh distracted
multitasking your cortisol goes through
the roof okay and if you're sedentary
okay you number one you're eating like
crazy and you're also and your cortisol
also goes through the roof sleep
mindfulness exercise all things to get
your cortisol down and finally number
four the last C
cook why because there are three things
that contribute to this dopamine
serotonin imbalance the first
tryptophane tryptophane is the precursor
to serotonin tryptophane is not an ultra
processed food it is the rarest amino
acid you find it in eggs chicken fish
not exactly Ultra processed food number
two fructose fructose reduces serotonin
okay and there's lots of fructose in in
the ultrapress food and finally lastly
omega-3 fatty acids and omega-3 fatty
acids are in again eggs and in um in uh
marine life okay there there's a little
bit of Omega-3s and vegetables you know
ala which is doesn't reach the brain so
that's not a that's not a big winner for
uh fixing this problem so you need high
tryptophane low fructose High Omega-3s
sounds like real food to
me
so uh connect contribute cope cook it
will Tamp down your dopamine reduce your
cortisol raise your serotonin improve
your mental health improve your
metabolic public health and will solve
your
problem it won't solve societies we have
to work on getting the whole world to
understand what the problem is before we
can fix it Dr Robert leting what is the
thing we haven't talked about the most
important topic we haven't talked about
that we should have wow
well we
have a systemic Health crisis
diabetes metabolic
syndrome um dementia cancer we have a
mental health
crisis
depression
suicide
schizophrenia uh autism
add we have a global Health crisis we
have cyber bullying we have social
inequality we have
War we have um climate change planet is
ulating all at the same
time
coincidence or are these
somehow inextricably
related are these the same thing or are
these different things if we believe
they are separate we're going to solve
try to solve each one individual
and never get to the root
cause the root
cause is our amydala the fearce center
of our
brain it's under
attack from all of the things we've
talked about
today that dysfunctional amydala is the
driver of chronic disease it is the
driver of the Mental Health crisis it is
the driver of the global health and
planetary crisis
there are four breaks on the amydala and
they're all dysfunctional today and
they're all dysfunctional because of the
things we've talked about today because
of cortisol because of stress because of
ultra-processed food because of sleep
deprivation because of the um uh change
in the environment because of air
pollution because of um all the things
that ultimately impact our brain's
ability to transduce information
until we recognize where the problem is
we're going to be spinning our
Wheels we can do this we can back out
the same way we drove into the Stitch
but you can't solve a problem until you
know what the problem
is Dr Robert leting thank you so much we
have a closing tradition on this podcast
where the last guest leaves a question
for the next guest not knowing who
they're leaving it for and the question
that's been left for you is here we go
let's have a look
okay nice question um what would you
tell your 20-year-old self that you wish
you knew and that would have positively
impacted your life and avoided
pain I wish I had
known
that I didn't have to please everyone
there's a book called the courage of
being
disliked it's courageous to be disliked
I was afraid of being disliked and
because I was afraid of being disliked I
was
disliked it's such a wish I had
known that nugget of Truth early on in
my career
thank you so much Dr pleasure thank you
I have to say your work is exceptional
um your books are incredible I've
got three of them here but I know there
there's many more um I'd recommend them
all incredibly highly the hacking of the
American mind is a fantastic book that
doesn't just apply to Americans it
applies to um all Industries around the
world um all Western economies around
the world which are set up in in very
similar ways fat chance and another book
that I've been through um in detail is
about beating the odds against sugar
processed food obesity and disease which
covers much of your work in the studies
that you referenced today an incredible
incredible book and I also have this
book called metabolical did I pronounce
that correctly you did metabolical the L
and the lies of processed food nutrition
and modern medicine which is a little
bit of a bigger book but it's um it
gives more of the foundations around
metabolism which I think a lot of people
don't understand so thank you thank you
for um your your Brilliance in so many
ways and but thank you for your life's
work because your life's work is Saving
Lives it's propelling us forward it's
it's driving a conversation forward and
you do it in a way that's so
unbelievably engaging that it's hard not
to pay attention so thank you Robert
well thank you and thank you for you
doing what you do
[Music]
a